---
author: Dominic LaRoche
date: YYYY-MM-DD
slug: INSERT\_SLUG\_HERE
status: draft
title: When is a composition not a composition?
categories:
  - r
---
tl/dr; Never.

What *is* a Composition?
========================

Lets first start with the definition of a composition, since many readers may not be familiar with that term. A composition is a set of measurements that sum to an arbitrary whole. These measurements are therefore proportions of the whole and are, by definition, not independent.

A classic example of a composition comes from the study of rocks (otherwise known as minerology). Rocks are usually classified by what they are made of, e.g. granite is a mixture of quartz and feldspar. The exact mixture, or proportions, of these ingredients provides further classification. Clearly, the total amount of quartz and feldspar will depend on the size of the rock in question. Two identical specimens of different sizes will be expected to have the exact same proportions, but the total wieght of each part will be directly proportional to the size of the rock.

This all seems very obvious when considering the composition of a rock. But compositions arise in many other scientific pursuits and the compositional properties of the measurements are frequently ignored. For example, in metabolomics a sample is collected and the quantities of certain metabolites are measured, usually as proportions. Or in economics one might study the spending habits of consumers, but the total amount spent might not be as informative as the proportion of an individual consumer's total income. Additionally, many of the technologies at the forefront of the push for 'personalized medicine' result in compositional data. Most notably RNASeq, which measures the expression patterns of an individuals genes, generates relative abundances of gene transcripts with the total number of each transcript depending on several techincal or experimental factors which are of no interest biologically.

Why should I care about compositions?
=====================================

Compositional data are non-negative data which are subject to a sum constraint, i.e. all the elements must sum to unity. This simple constraint has some important consequences for many standard statistical methodologies including correlation and regression. Compositional data contain only relative information, i.e. the information about any individual component, or group of components, is relative to the other components and no absolute information about the absolute value of the component. For example, if we know that 20% of the food in a refrigerator is composed of fruit we do not know how much total fruit there is. If the refrigerator is full then there will be substantially more fruit than if the refrigerator is nearly empty. It is, therefore, important to recognize the types of inferences that can be made from compositional data, e.g. no inference can be made on the actual abundances.

Potential problems associated with compositional data were identified as early as 1897 by Pearson who noted that spurious correlations can be induced through ratios of independent variables, e.g. if *X*, *Y*, and *Z* are uncorrelated then *X*/*Z* and *Y*/*Z* will be correlated. Despite the fact that compositional data naturally arises in a wide variety of scientific disciplines, a general method for analysis of compositional data was not developed until John Aitchison published his seminal book in 1986.

When can I ignore the compositional property of my data?
========================================================

My work involves the analysis of data generated by next-generation sequencing (NGS) platforms. Data from NGS platforms generally falls under the umbrella of 'high dimensional compositions'. I have often\* been asked how severe the constant sum constraint is for high high dimensional data with such a large constraint, when can we safely ignore the compositional nature of the data? (\* O.K. often is entirely relative here!). This post is an attempt to answer that question.

Intuitively, if we increase the constraint to infinity we no longer have a constraint. Is there some constraint &lt;inf for which a composition ceses to be a composition for all practical purposes?

Also, if you slice up a composition into nearly infinite parts, how much depedence would one expect between the parts. Intuitively, this dependence would decrease with increasing parts.

So let's put some math behind the intuition and try to answer this question.
